185 This good man, who is filled with one hundred kinds of good qualities, keeping and spreading his qualities, overcomes
evil beings and attains recollection, intelligence and understanding (smṛtimatigati). When the voice of the best asceti
c (śramaṇavara) resonates, cyclic existences in the ten directions are purified.186 He, who is filled with sublime confi
dence (adhimukti), who is free from impurities (rajas) and darkness (tamas), purifying a hundred [previous] existences, 
leading gods and humans (devamānuṣa) to the sphere without destruction, being endowed with ten powers and the sky-like m
ind, becomes free from existence.187 As he purifies his speech gracefully and gloriously, he has no harshness, erroneous
ness, or impurity. Since he is incomparable in the three states of existence (tribhava), he is respected by gods and hum
ans. Being free from existence, he brings happiness and benefits to living beings.188 He, who trains himself with confid
ence, recollection, intelligence and understanding (adhimuktismṛtimatigati), conquers the power of others (parabala) by 
means of ten powers (daśabala) and superior powers, defeats enemy troops, and attains the state of immortality. O good m
an, beyond existence, the voice of the wise resonates.189 Even though he does not go anywhere separated from this assemb
ly, he educates gods and humans without moving in ten directions. He does not stay any particular place, but he stays wi
th his intelligence and is unwavering in the realm of the dharma (dharmadhātu), just as earth is unshakable.190 As the s
unshine removes darkness and impurities, so does this good man. He, who is united with the light of insight, spreads glo
rious light, thereby all the realm of Māra, having been filled with the light of the Sage (muni), is outshone (dhyāmīkṛt
a).191 Just as the wind in open space enters everywhere without any base (sthāna) and has no thought-constructions (avik
alpa) or false imagination (parikalpa), just so the sons of the buddha (jinaputra) whose minds are like open space are i
n accordance with all living beings and thus they are respected by gods and humans.192 The water in the ocean (sāgarajal
a) of three thousandfold worlds is measurable, a bird-track in the sky (gaganaśakunipada) in ten directions is expressib
le, and someone can have the same thought as all living beings; but the great qualities (mahāguṇa) of the son of the Sag
e (muni) are inexhaustible.

Māra Pāpīyān

When this teaching was taught and verses were accomplished, the wicked Māra, having magically created four kinds of troop
s (caturaṅgabala), came to the courtyard where the Lord stayed with them, stationed them on the outside of the courtyard
, disguised himself as a householder (gṛhapati), went in front of the Lord, and bowed down at his feet (bhagavataḥ pādau
śirobhir vanditvā), saying:“Because these good men, the bodhisatva Gaganagañja and Ratnapāṇi, are endowed with immeasur
able good qualities, and so are the other bodhisatvas, it is possible to manifest such wonderful teachings (āścaryādbhut
adharma) and magical displays (prātihārya) in this world. However, Lord, will there be someone believing these magical d
isplays in the future?”The Lord said: “As a small amount of water in the great ocean can be lifted up by means of the ti
p of a hair (vālāgrakoṭi), so few beings will have faith in the magical displays (prātihārya) of these good men. However
, there will be great many beings who do not have faith, compared to the quantity of water in the ocean.”Having heard th
is word, the wicked Māra, became contented, elated, enraptured, overjoyed, exultant and jubilant (atha khalu māraḥ pāpīy
āṃs tuṣṭodagrāttamanāḥ pramuditaḥ prītisaumanasyajāto bhavati), danced and was about to leave the congregation.The the v
enerable Śāriputra addressed himself to the Lord: “O Lord, who is this man (puruṣa) going away from this congregation wi
th so much pleasure?”The Lord said: “O Śāriputra, he is the Māra, who, disguised as a householder, came to the tathāgata
in order to make this exposition of religion (dharmaparyāya) disappear. Having heard that there will be only few beings
who have belief in this religious exposition, he is about to leave this congregation, joyfully singing, ‘There will be 
only few followers of the ascetic Gautama, but mine will be numerous.’”At that time the bodhisatva Gaganagañja said to t
he wicked Māra: “Wicked One, why are you leaving after having shown your true colors?”Then the wicked Māra thought: “Bec
ause the bodhisatva Gaganagañja and other bodhisatvas will come to my territory (māragocara), to say nothing of the tath
āgata (prāg eva tathāgataḥ). So now I will go back to my territory.”Then the bodhisatva Gaganagañja, having stopped the 
wicked Māra and his servants in the vault of the sky, exercised his magical power in such a way (tathādhiṣṭhita) that th
ey could not go back to his territory, and said this to the Māra: “Wicked One, as open space is without obstruction (ana
vṛti), why do you not go back to your territory?”Māra said: “Son of good family, the sky is without obstruction (gaganam
anāvṛtam) to you, but it looks dark to us. The only we can see in front of us is darkness (tamo’ndhakāra), except for t
he congregation (parṣanmaṇḍala) of the Buddha on the ground, which looks luminous.”Gaganagañja said: “So it is, Wicked O
ne, it is beings who have the light of the dharma in their thoughts (śukladharmacittasatva), and the darkness in front o
f you is because of the works of Māra (mārakarman).”Māra said: “O good man, from now on I will never do the works of Mār
a.”Gaganagañja said: “As it is difficult to keep your promise among such wicked beings, you should come down here and li
sten the discipline of the dharma (dharmavinaya) taught by the tathāgata, together with your servants.”Then the wicked M
āra and his servants unwillingly (akāmaka) went down from the vault of the sky, and the bodhisatva Gaganagañja said this
to the congregation of bodhisatvas: “Sons of good family, may all of you elucidate (pratibhātu) the gates into the dhar
ma of transcending the path of the works of Māra (mārakarmamārgasamatikramadharmamukha).”The bodhisatva Kāñcanaparvatarā
ja thereupon said: “Giving up your sphere is to be attached to the sphere of Māra (māraviṣaya). Knowing that everywhere 
is the sphere of the buddha (buddhaviṣaya) is to know the sphere of the buddha. If you do not see the sphere of the budd
ha, how can you see your own sphere? In that way the bodhisatva who has transcended the sphere has also transcended the 
sphere of Māra. This is the gate into the dharma of transcending the sphere of Māra.”The bodhisatva Ratnaśrī said: “Sinc
e the objects of thought is the sphere of Māra (māragocara), where there is not any dharma perceived, what would be acco
mplished by Māra there? Since the attainment is without basis, the understanding through time that there is no attainmen
t with basis is the gate into the dharma called ‘Transcending the sphere of Māra of the bodhisatva.’”The bodhisatva Ratn
apāṇi said: “When you grasp or possess something, then the Māra will find your weak point (avatāraṃ labh-). When you do 
not grasp any dharma, there will be no disagreement with anyone. When you are alone without the second, you do not make 
your own thinking or own place [into problem], and then how can you stay together with the Māra? Thus the bodhisatva who
is established in nothing transcends the sphere of the Māra.”The bodhisatva Āryaratna said: “‘Sin’ (āpatti) is an accus
ation, and in such an accusation the Māra can find a weak point. What is the absence of sin (anpatti) is not to enter in
to the consciousness of following in accordance with the distinguishing marks [of sins] (nimittānusāriṇavijñānāpraveśa),
and thus the bodhisatva who is established in the limit of no distinguishing mark transcends the sphere of the Māra.”Th
e bodhisatva Ratnacitta said: “The Lord taught that vices (kleśa) are just like a reflection (pratibimba) and an illusio
n (pratibhāsa). Knowing that the reflection and illusion are not changing nor not changing, not coming nor going, withou
t inside nor outside, and remain in no location or dimension (sthānāsthānavigatā) is not living with any vice. The vices
do not arise due to the absence of thought-construction; the vices do not cease due to the absence of thought-construct
ion. In this way, the bodhisatva who is established in the absence of thought-construction and false imagination transce
nds the sphere of the Māra.”The bodhisatva Ratnākara said: “Happiness is a latent tendency (anuśaya); unhappiness is an 
obstruction. One who is without happiness or unhappiness does not have any affection (anunaya) or hostility (pratigha). 
One who is without affection or hostility is established in sameness. One who is established in sameness does not differ
entiate any dharma. One who is established in the absence of differentiation does not think about sameness or non-samene
ss. When you obtain this inconceivable dharma, the Māra cannot find your weak point.”The bodhisatva Ratnaparityāga said:
“The works of Māras (mārakarman) is produced from obsession with self (ātmasamutthāna). When you are established in the
purity of self, what can the Māra do? Why is that? Because vices are purified by the purity of self (ātmaviśuddhi), and
all dharmas are purified by the purity of vices. That which purifies all dharmas purifies open space. Thus the bodhisat
va who is established in the purity of open space transcends the sphere of the Māra.The bodhisatva Dharmarāja said: “Jus
t as one, who obtains the consecration of the king (rājābhiṣeka), and who has power and numerous attendants, is fearless
, just so the bodhisatva, who obtains the consecration, and who has the attendants of the jewel of the dharma (dharmarat
na), has no fear of any Māra. Here the consecration is to reach the extreme of the qualities of the buddha (paryantabudd
hadharma) and to fulfill them, and the attendants of the jewel of the dharma (dharmaratna) is to learn the dharmas taugh
t by the buddhas in ten directions. Since the bodhisatva who is established in such a way transcends the sphere of the M
āra, this is the gate into the dharma called ‘Transcending the sphere of the Māra.’”The bodhisatva Śailaśikharasaṃghaṭṭa
narāja said: “Just as the wind enters through a chink, just so the Māra can find a weak point where there is a chink in 
thought. The bodhisatva therefore should not have any chink in his thought. Here, the thought without chink is, that is 
to say, to fulfill the emptiness endowed with all sorts of excellencies (tadyathāpi nāma cchidrān mārutaḥ praviśati evam
eva yato yata eva cittasya cchidraṃ bhavati tatas tata eva māro ’vatāraṃ labhate | tasmāt sadā ’cchidracittena bodhisat
tvena bhavitavyaṃ tatreyam acchidracittatā | yad idaṃ sarvākārajñatāyāḥ śūnyatāyāḥ paripūrir). This is the gate to the l
ight of the dharma (dharmālokamukha) that the bodhisatva transcends the sphere of the Māra.”Quotation from ŚikṣMS 60b5-7
; B 117,7-10; ŚikṣTib(D) 67b1-3; ŚikṣChi(T.1636) 97c27-98a1.ŚikṣMS: āryagaganagañjasūtre ’py uktaṃ (6) tadyathāpi nāma c
chidrān mārutaḥ praviśati evam eva ‹yato›1 yata eva cittasya cchidraṃ bhavati tatas tata eva māro ’vatāraṃ labhate tasmā
t sadā ’cchidracittena bodhisattvena bhavitavyaṃ tatreyam acchidracittatā | yad idaṃ sarvvākārajñatāyāḥ śūnyatāyāḥ pari(
7)pūrir iti |ŚikṣTib: ’phags pa nam mkha’ mdzod kyi mdo las kyaṅ | ’di lta ste dper na bu ga nas rluṅ ’jug pa de bźin du
gaṅ daṅ gaṅ nas sems la skyon byuṅ ba de daṅ de ñid nas bdud kyis glags rñed do || de lta bas na byaṅ chub sems dpa’ rt
ag tu sems la skyon med par bya’o ||ŚikṣChi: 又虚空藏經云譬如孔隙聲入其中。菩薩亦爾。若心有間隙則魔得其便。是故菩薩令心常無間隙。若心無間隙。則諸相圓滿。及空性圓滿。The bodhisatva 
Priyadarśana said: “That among all kinds of seeing, seeing the buddha and his dharma is the most excellent. Here, seeing
the buddha is not to see form, feeling, perception, formative factors or consciousness. The correct seeing (samyagdṛṣṭi
) is to see the buddha. Seeing the dharma is not to make any mental effort (manasikāra). The unchanging seeing is to be 
free from attachment (rāga). Being free from attachment is to see the dharma. That the bodhisatva comes to be endowed wi
th seeing the buddha and his dharma in that way is transcending the sphere of the Māra. This is the gate into the dharma
called ‘Transcending the sphere of the Māra.’”The bodhisatva Indrajālin said: “Since the deeds of the Māra arises from 
action [of speech], mental activity and movements [of body] (iñjitamanyanāsyandita), the bodhisatva should be free from 
the basis of action [of speech], mental activity and movements [of body], which are superficial mental activities (ayoni
śomanasikāra). With the thorough practice (yoniśaḥprayoga), the bodhisatva who is free from action [of speech], mental a
ctivity and movements [of body] transcends the sphere of the Māra.”The bodhisatva Guṇarājaprabhāsa said: “As many as the
re are antidotes (pratipakṣa), so many are the works of the Māra (mārakarman). The absence of antidote is [included in] 
the realm of the dharma (dharmadhātu), and all dharmas are [included in] the realm of the dharma. Since all dharmas are 
included in the realm of the dharma (dharmadhātusamavasaraṇa), all the dharmas are understood through understanding the 
realm of the dharma. The works of the Māra is not apprehended apart from the realm of the dharma, and the realm of the d
harma which is the same as the works of the Māra is not different from suchness (tathatā). In this way, the bodhisatva w
ho enters into one single principle (ekanaya) transcends the sphere of the Māra.”The bodhisatva Gandhahastin said: “The 
weak (durbala) can be harmed by the Māra; but the strong (balika) cannot be harmed by the Māra. The weak is afraid of th
e three gates of liberation (trivimokṣamukha). Since the strong is not afraid of the three gates of liberation, namely, 
directly seeing (pratyakṣa), penetrating (supratividdha), and meditatively cultivating. One who is not afraid of them tr
anscends the sphere of the Māra, and thus this is the gate into the light of the dharma (dharmālokamukha) called ‘Transc
ending the sphere of the Māra.”The bodhisatva Maitreya said: “Just as the water in the great ocean (mahāsāgara) has a si
ngle taste (ekarasa), so all dharmas in the great ocean of the knowledge of the dharma (dharmajñānasāgara) have a single
taste. Since the works of the Māra (mārakarma) and the works of the buddha (buddhakarma), both are same in the perspect
ive of emptiness (śūnyatā), signlessness (animitta), wishlessness (apraṇihita), birthlessness (ajāti), and the absence o
f origination (anutpāda), the bodhisatva who enters into the single taste (ekarasa) transcends the sphere of the Māra.”T
he bodhisatva Gaganagañja said: “O friends (vata mārṣāḥ), since open space transcends all spheres, it is not the sphere 
of sight (cakṣurviṣaya), and likewise it is not the sphere of hearing, smelling, tasting, body and mind (śrotraghrāṇajih
vākāyamanaḥ). Since all dharmas are the sphere of the essential nature of open space (gaganasvabhāva), body and speech (
kāyavāc) are the light of knowledge (jñānāloka) in accordance with the sameness of open space (gaganasamatā). Thus the b
odhisatva who obtains this light of knowledge transcends the sphere of the Māra, and this is the gate into the dharma ca
lled ‘Transcending the sphere of the Māra.’”The bodhisatva Mañjuśrī said: “O good man, all you have said is the works of
the Māra and the sphere of the Māra. Why is that? Things expressed by words are a mere information (vijñapti); but the 
speech of the buddha (buddhaghoṣa) is beyond verbal expressions (anakṣara). Since, as many as are words, so many are the
works of the Māra, when there is not any word, nothing would be done by the Māra. Since that which is without word is w
ithout information, one never perceives the self or other (na ātmaparaṃ samanupaśyati). Since there is no self or others
, the dharma which causes benefit or harm does not exist. Understanding like this is transcending the sphere of the Māra
, and, son of good family, this is the gate into the dharma called ‘Transcending the sphere of the Māra of the bodhisatv
a.’”Then the bodhisatva Gaganagañja said this to the wicked Māra: “Wicked One, did you hear this gate into the dharma of
transcending the sphere of the Māra?”Māra said: “Yes, I heard.”Gaganagañja said: “Wicked One, are you still going to do
the works of the Māra among the bodhisatvas who entered into such guiding principle of the dharma (dharmanaya)?”Māra sa
id: “Son of good family, by hearing this gate into the dharma of transcending the sphere of the Māra, I would not dare t
o do the works of the Māra among those who listen to it, to say nothing of the bodhisatvas who see it directly (pratyakṣ
a) by their knowledges.”At that time, four gods, Saṃcayavigata, Sukhasaṃcaya, Gandhavat, and Prāsādavat, who guarded the
bodhisatvas, said to the Wicked Māra:“In the past, at the place of awakening (bodhimaṇḍa), the Lord met you, your force
s, troops, army and servants directly. At that time, the Lord touched the ground with the jewels in his hand (ratnapāṇi)
, which are the accumulation of friendliness, compassion, generosity, discipline, restrain, gentleness, morality, learni
ng, concentration, insight, firm and burning effort, merit and knowledge (maitrīkaruṇadānavinayasaṃyamasauratyaśīlaśruta
samādhiprajñādṛḍhottaptavīryapuṇyajñānasaṃbhāra), and then the endless, limitless worlds (anantāparyanteṣu lokadhātuṣu) 
were shaken. In that way it was manifested that you and your forces were defeated, but will you still do the works of Mā
ra under the Lord and the bodhisatvas? You should pay homage to the tathāgata and the assembly of the bodhisatvas!”Then 
the Wicked One, having conjured up canopies adorned with eighty four thousand jewels (ratnacchattra), offered them to th
e congregations. Having held numerous kinds of divine flowers (divyapuṣpa), incense (gandha), garlands (mālā) and unguen
ts (upalepana), he scattered them on the place where the Lord stayed, and said this to the Lord together with his servan
ts: “If the bodhisatva Gaganagañja gives us the treasury of open space (gaganagañja), we will produce the thought of the
incomparable complete awakening (anuttarasamyaksaṃbodhi).”The bodhisatva Gaganagañja said: “Wicked One, do you see this
treasury of open space?”Māra said: “I see it, son of good family. It is far greater than all the displays of desire rea
lm, buddha-fields, and my own abode (svabhavana), and it is full of the jewels for gods and humans.Gaganagañja said: “Wi
cked One, I will give you all these treasuries of open space so that you can produce the thought of the incomparable com
plete awakening.”Then the wicked Māra, together with his eighty-four thousand creatures, produced the thought of the inc
omparable complete awakening.At that time, Durmukha who was the head of five hundred sons of the Māra, lacking faith and
desiring the non-dharma (adharmakāma), said: “Even though our father produced the thought of awakening, we should striv
e against this exposition of religion (dharmaparyāya).”Then the Lord said this to the bodhisatva Gaganagañja: “Son of go
od family, elucidate the words of knowledge-mantra (vidyāmantrapada) by which the evil ones as numerous as the grains of
sand in the river Gaṅga are subjugated (nigraha) and established in awakening.”The bodhisatva Gaganagañja thereupon pro
nounced the words of knowledge-mantra as follows:tadyathā | avatte | vivatte | saṃvatte | sahitānusandhi | duruttaraṇi |
nirghātani | maitryāyukte | kāruṇaniṣyande | satyavati | bhūrakṣe | dharmanivṛtti | dharmarakṣe | akkhule | nikhilini |
hulu hulu hulu hulu hulu | tatkāre | tathāvādite | śīlānuvṛtti | akṣayanirdeśe | kleśaparīkṣe | buddhādhiṣṭhite dharmaj
vālini | saṃghānugame | anuttare | anatikramaṇiye | nigrahaṇimārapakṣasya yuktikṛte | adānte | aśaste | svaviṣayānugame 
| āryaguṇakāre | siddhisiddhivate | mokṣānukūle | nigrahaṇi parapravadīnāṃ | dārṣaṇi māraparṣada | avaśāntā | catvāro ma
hārājānaḥ | śakro devānāṃ indro brahmā sahapatir | buddhaprasannānāṃ | devanāgayakṣakṛtaṃ paritrāṇaṃ | satvānāṃ svastyay
ānāṃ | dharmabhanakānāṃ | ārakṣayai | saddharmasya ca parigrahāya |Then, immediately after these words of knowledge-mant
ra were pronounced by the bodhisatva Gaganagañja, the world system of three thousandfold worlds (trisāhasramahāsāhasralo
kadhātu) was shaken in six ways.The five hundred evil ones, who were without faith and clinging to the non-dharma, heard
this sound from open space: “The Māra, his sons, or his followers (mārakāyika), who do not produce the thought of awake
ning and do not give up the works of the Māra after having heard these words of the knowledge-mantra (vidyāmantrapada), 
the crowns of their heads will be destroyed by the lighting and blazing thunderbolt of the Yakṣa Vajrapāṇi.”Then, having
looked up at the sky, the sons of the Māra saw five hundred Vajrapāṇis holding blazing thunderbolt, and produced the th
ought of awakening from the fear and terror (bhayabhīṭa).The Lord at that time smiled (atha khalu bhagavān smitaṃ prādur
akarot), and the venerable Ānanda asked its meaning.Then the Lord said: “Ānanda, did you see those five hundred sons of 
the Māra producing the thought of the incomparable complete awakening (anuttarasamyaksaṃbodhi) out of fear and terror?”Ā
nanda said: “O Lord, I saw it.”The Lord said: “Ānanda, when the wicked Māra attains awakening, they will also be born in
the buddha-fields as bodhisatvas having different name.”The venerable Ānanda said this to the Lord: “O Lord, when will 
the wicked Māra wake up to incomparable complete awakening? What will he be called after having attained the awakening? 
And what will be the name of that universe?”The Lord said: “Ānanda, the wicked Māra, doing the works of the Māra in the 
buddha-fields of ten directions again and again, will hear the dharma of destroying vices by the essence of diamond (vaj
ragarbhakleśapramathanadharma) from the awakened buddhas there, and will see the secret practice, behaviour, good qualit
ies, maintaining morality, practice, ceremony and application of the buddhas and the bodhisatvas. Then, as long as he ha
s faith in the thought of awakening, he will be born [in the universe of] the tathāgata Anantāmaladhvaja, will stop doin
g the works of the Māra by the teaching of [the tathāgata there], will maturate this roots of good, and, by the thought 
which is no thought, in accordance with all the light of the dharma of the buddha (sarvabuddhadharmāvabhāsānugata), will
produce the thought of awakening.After that, he will serve, respect, worship, homage and give offerings to the uncounta
ble and innumerable tathāgatas, and will become a monk following their teachings.Having become a monk, he will uphold th
e true dharma (saddharma) in the three times, and bringing innumerable beings to maturity.After immeasurable forty-four 
intermediate aeons (antarakalpa), he will wake up to incomparable complete awakening, and then in the aeon called Viśudd
hi he will be born in the Pariśuddhipratiṣṭhita universe as the tathāgata Supratiṣṭhitadharmālokalabdha, worthy of offer
ings, the perfectly awakened one, perfect in wisdom and conduct … a blessed one (supratiṣṭhitadharmālokalabdho nāma tath
āgato ’rhan samyakṣaṃbuddho vidyācaraṇasaṃpannaḥ … bhagavān).Again, Ānanda, the Pariśuddhipratiṣṭhita universe will be t
hriving, prosperous, safe, well-provided, and filled with gods and men (ṛddhaś ca sphītaś ca kṣemaś ca subhikṣaś cākīrṇa
devamānuṣaś ca).Ānanda, just as whatever enjoyments (bhoga) or entertainments (samudācāra) living beings in the Tuṣita H
eaven (tuṣitabhavanastha) have, so there will be enjoyments and entertainments [in that universe.]Ānanda, the tathāgata 
Supratiṣṭhitadharmālokalabdha will live to forty internal aeons (antarakalpa) together with the great assembly of sixty-
four koṭis of disciples and the congregation of twelve thousands of bodhisatvas.O Ānanda, those who are the Māra’s sons 
and followers (mārakāyika) at present will be born in the Pariśuddhipratiṣṭhita universe, will reach the complete unsurp
assable awakening, and will be predicted to attain of incomparable complete awakening by the tathāgata Supratiṣṭhitadhar
mālokalabdha, namely the Māra, in his buddha-field.”

Śakrabrahmalokapāla

When that prophecy (vyākaraṇa) of the wicked Māra was set forth, all the assembly of Indras, Brahmās and Lokapālas were a
stonished (āścaryaprāpta), and uttered a joyous utterance (udānam udānayati): “Even though they have done that many work
s of the Māra, they still can produce the thought of incomparable complete awakening by means of meaningfulness of seein
g the tathāgata (tathāgatāmoghadarśana). The discipline of the dharma (dharmavinaya), which is well spoken (svākhyāta) b
y the Lord, is marvelous!O Lord, who is the son or daughter of good family (kulaputrā vā kuladuhitaro vā) who could meas
ure (pramātṛ-) the buddha-fields (buddhakṣetra) from one person to another (pudgalena pudgalaḥ) because it cannot be mea
sured by any disciple or isolated buddha?”The Lord said: “So it is, friends. The sphere of the buddha is just like what 
you said.However, friends, their thoughts are dependently originated, and I see living beings who walks with desire and 
who stops without desire, who wears a dharma-robe being full of impurities (saṃkleśa) and who puts on the robe without i
mpurities (kleśa), and who eats porridge out of greed and who stops it without appetite. O friends, the types of behavio
r of living beings are so diverse.Since there are living beings who strive for [the buddha’s] words by understanding a c
ondensed statement (udghaṭitajñā) or by understanding a full, detailed explanations (vipañcitajña), the tathāgata gives 
them the discourses of teaching the dharma, accordingly to each individual (yathāpratyarhadharmāvatāraṇanirdeśa).O frien
ds, vices are neither established in place nor direction, and they are neither a collection nor accumulated things.Vices
arise superficially (ayoniśas) but purity arises in the fundamental way (yoniśas). In that way, if you investigate the 
arising of vices fundamentally, then they arise as purity.It is therefore, with this in mind, said that, when one knows 
wrong views (mithyādṛṣṭi) as wrong views, namely as they really are (yathābhūta), he will have right views (samyagdṛṣṭi)
.Wrong views would never be right views, would never not be right views, would never be separated from right views. Howe
ver, if one, after having known wrong views as wrong views, is not established in them without any action or effort, the
n he will enter into the way of right views, thus this is called the right view (samyagdṛṣṭi).O friends, vices are the d
arkness but the purity is the light. Vices are of weak power but the expanded vision is powerful. Vices are accidental b
ut its essential nature is of pure root. Vices are false imaginations but its essential nature is the absence of false i
magination (kavir2 mārṣā kleśāḥ | āloko viśuddhiḥ | durbalāḥ kleśāḥ | balavatī vipaśyanā | āgantukāḥ kleśāḥ | mūlaviśudd
hā prakṛtiḥ | parikalpāḥ kleśāḥ | aparikalpā prakṛtiḥ).Quotation from RgvbhMS 25a-b?; RgvbhJ 44,8-45,9; RgvbhTib 98a3-b5
; RgvbhChi T1611, 833a15-b9.Rgvbh: kavirmārṣā kleśāḥ | āloko viśuddhiḥ | durbalāḥ kleśāḥ | balavatī vipaśyanā | āgantukā
ḥ kleśāḥ | mūlaviśuddhā prakṛtiḥ | parikalpāḥ kleśāḥ | aparikalpā prakṛtiḥ |RgvbhTib: nam mkha’i dpe ’di rgyas par ni md
o ji lta ba bźin rtogs par bya ste | draṅ sroṅ chen po ñon moṅs pa ni mun pa | rnam par dag pa ni snaṅ ba’o || ñon moṅs 
pa ni stobs chuṅ ba | lhag mthoṅ ni stobs daṅ ldan pa’o || ñon moṅs pa ni glo bur pa | raṅ bźin gyis rnam par dag pa ni 
rtsa ba’o || ñon moṅs pa ni kun tu brtags pa | raṅ bźin ni kun tu ma brtags pa’o ||RgvbhChi: 應知彼經中言。諸 善男子。煩惱本無體。真性本明淨。一切
煩惱羸薄。毘婆舍那有大勢力。一切煩惱客塵。自性清淨心根本。一切諸煩惱虛妄分別。自性清淨心如實不分別。It is like this, friends, this great earth is based on water, water is
supported by wind, wind is founded on space, but space is dependent on nothing. Thus, among these four elements, namely
earth, water, wind, and space, space is more powerful and firmer than any of the other elements, and is not accumulated
. Since it is not accumulated, it is neither originated nor destroyed and is stable with its own essence (tad yathā mārṣ
ā iyaṃ mahāpṛthivy apsu pratiṣṭhitā | āpo vāyau pratiṣṭhitāḥ | vāyur ākāśe pratiṣṭhitaḥ | apratiṣṭhitaṃ cākāśam | evam e
ṣāṃ caturṇāṃ dhātūnāṃ pṛthivīdhātor abdhātor vāyudhātor ākāśadhātur eva balī yo dṛḍho ’nupacayo ’napacayo ’nutpanno ’nir
uddhaḥ sthitaḥ svarasayogena |).Rgvbh: tad yathā mārṣā iyaṃ mahāpṛthivy apsu pratiṣṭhitā | āpo vāyau pratiṣṭhitāḥ | vāyu
r ākāśe pratiṣṭhitaḥ | apratiṣṭhitaṃ cākāśam | evam eṣāṃ caturṇāṃ dhātūnāṃ pṛthivīdhātor abdhātor vāyudhātor ākāśadhātur
eva balī yo dṛḍho ’calo ’nupacayo ’napacayo ’nutpanno ’niruddhaḥ sthitaḥ svarasayogena |RgvbhTib: draṅ sroṅ chen po ’di
lta ste | sa chen po ’di ni chu la rab tu gnas pa | chu ni rluṅ la rab tu gnas pa | rluṅ ni nam mkha’ la rab tu gnas pa
yin la | nam mkha’ ni gnas pa med pa’o || de bźin du khams bźi po ’di rnams las | sa’i khams daṅ | chu’i khams daṅ | rl
uṅ gi khams pas ni nam mkha’i khams ñid stobs daṅ ldan pa | brtan pa | mi g.yo ba | ’grib pa med pa | skye ba med pa | ’
gag pa med pa ste | raṅ gi daṅ gis gnas pa’o ||RgvbhChi: 諸佛子。譬如大地依水而住。水依風住風依空住。而彼虛空無依住處。諸善男子。如是四大地大水大風大空大。此四大中唯虛空大以為最勝。以
為大力。以為堅固。以為不動。以為不作。以為不散。不生不滅自然而住。[On the contrary,] these three elements [namely, earth, water, and wind] are endowed wi
th origination and destruction, unstable and of no long duration. It is perceived that these are changeable, but space i
s by no means changeable (tatra ya ete trayo dhātavas ta utpādabhaṅgayuktā anavasthitā acirasthāpinaḥ | dṛśyata eṣāṃ vik
āro na punar ākāśadhātoḥ kaścid vikāraḥ |).Rgvbh: tatra ya ete trayo dhātavas ta utpādabhaṅgayuktā anavasthitā acirasthā
pinaḥ | dṛśyata eṣāṃ vikāro na punar ākāśadhātoḥ kaścid vikāraḥ |RgvbhTib: de la khams gsum po gaṅ yin pa de dag ni skye
ba daṅ ’jig pa daṅ ldan pa | mi gnas pa yun riṅ du mi gnas pa ste | ’di dag la ni rnam par ’gyur pa mthoṅ gi | nam mkha
’i la ni rnam par ’gyur ba ’ga’ yaṅ med do ||RgvbhChi: 諸善男子。彼三種大生滅相應。無實體性剎那不住。諸佛子。此三種大變異無常。諸佛子。而虛空界常不變異。In that way, the
parts of personality, spheres and fields of perception have their basis in the actions and vices. The actions and vices
have their basis in the superficial mental effort. The superficial mental effort has its basis in the purity of origina
l nature. Therefore, it is said that the thought is basically pure but it is sullied by the occasional vices (evam eva s
kandhadhātvāyatanāni karmakleśapratiṣṭhitāni | karmakleśā ayoniśomanaskārapratiṣṭhitāḥ | ayoniśomanaskāraḥ prakṛtipariśu
ddhipratiṣṭhitaḥ | tata ucyate prakṛtiprabhāsvaraṃ cittam āgantukair upakleśair upakliśyata iti |).Rgvbh: evam eva skand
hadhātvāyatanāni karmakleśapratiṣṭhitāni | karmakleśā ayoniśomanaskārapratiṣṭhitāḥ | ayoniśomanaskāraḥ prakṛtipariśuddhi
pratiṣṭhitaḥ | tata ucyate prakṛtiprabhāsvaraṃ cittam āgantukair upakleśair upakliśyata iti |RgvbhTib: de bźin du | phuṅ
po daṅ | khams daṅ | skye mched dag ni las daṅ ñon moṅs pa la rab tu gnas pa’o || las daṅ ñon moṅs pa ni tshul bźin ma 
yin pa yid la byed pa la rab tu gnas pa | tshul bźin ma yin pa yid la byed pa ni raṅ bźin gyis yoṅs su dag pa la gnas pa
ste | des na sems kyi raṅ bźin ni ’od gsal ba ste | glo bur gyi ñon moṅs pas ñon ma moṅs pa’o źes brjod do źe’o ||Rgvbh
Chi: 諸佛子。如是陰界入依業煩惱住。諸煩惱業依不正思惟住。不正思惟依於佛性自性清淨心住。以是義故。經中說言。自性清淨心客塵煩惱染。Then the superficial mental effort, the actions and v
ices, and the parts of personality, spheres and fields of perception, all of them are originated from the combinations o
f causes and conditions. When causes and conditions are not combined, they are extinguished. But their original nature i
s of no cause nor condition. Consequently, they are never combined. Thus there is no origination nor destruction of it. 
(tatra paścād yo ’yoniśomanaskāro ye ca karmakleśā yāni ca skandhadhātvāyatanāni sarva ete hetupratyayasaṃgṛhītā utpadya
nte hetupratyayavisāmagryā nirudhyante | yā punaḥ sā prakṛtis tasyā na hetur na pratyayo na sāmagrī notpādo na nirodhaḥ 
|).Rgvbh: tatra paścād yo ’yoniśomanaskāro ye ca karmakleśā yāni ca skandhadhātvāyatanāni sarva ete hetupratyayasaṃgṛhīt
ā utpadyante hetupratyayavisāmagryā nirudhyante | yā punaḥ sā prakṛtis tasyā na hetur na pratyayo na sāmagrī notpādo na 
nirodhaḥ |RgvbhTib: de la tshul bźin ma yin pa’i yid la byed pa gaṅ yin pa daṅ | las daṅ ñon moṅs pa gaṅ yin pa daṅ | ph
uṅ po daṅ | khams daṅ | skye mched gaṅ yin pa’i chos ’di mtha’ dag ni rgyu rkyen gyis bsdus pas skye ba rgyu rkyen daṅ b
ral na ’gag par ’gyur gyi | raṅ bźin gaṅ yin pa de ni rgyu med pa | rkyen med pa | tshogs pa med pa | skye ba med pa | ’
gag pa med pa’o ||RgvbhChi: 諸善男子。所有邪念。所有煩惱業。所有陰界入。如是諸法從於因緣和合而生。以諸因緣壞散而滅。諸善男子。彼自性清淨心無因無緣故。無和合不生不滅。The essential nature is
like space, the superficial mental effort is like wind, the actions and vices are like water, and the parts of personal
ity, spheres and fields of perception are like earth. Therefore, it is said that all dharmas are devoid of any root, the
root which is established in nothing, the root of purity, and the root of no root (tatra yathākāśadhātus tathā prakṛtiḥ
| yathā vāyudhātus tathāyoniśomanasikāraḥ | yathābdhātus tathā karmakleśāḥ | yathā pṛthivīdhātus tathā skandhadhātvāyat
anāni | tata ucyante sarvadharmā asāramūlā apratiṣṭhānamūlāḥ śuddhamūlā amūlamūlā iti |).Rgvbh: tatra yathākāśadhātus ta
thā prakṛtiḥ | yathā vāyudhātus tathāyoniśomanasikāraḥ | yathābdhātus tathā karmakleśāḥ | yathā pṛthivīdhātus tathā skan
dhadhātvāyatanāni | tata ucyante sarvadharmā asāramūlā apratiṣṭhānamūlāḥ śuddhamūlā amūlamūlā iti |RgvbhTib: de la nam m
kha’i khams ji lta pa de ltar ni raṅ bźin no || rluṅ gi khams ji lta ba de ltar ni tshul bźin ma yin pa yid la byed pa’o
|| chu’i khams ji ta ba de ltar ni las daṅ ñon moṅs pa’o || sa’i khams ji lta ba de ltar ni phuṅ po daṅ | skye mched da
ṅ | khams rnams so || des na chos thams cad ni rtsa ba yoṅs su chad pa ste | sñiṅ po med pa’i rtsa ba can | mi gnas pa’i
rtsa ba can | dag pa’i rtsa ba can | rtsa ba med pa’i rtsa ba can źes brjod do źe’o ||RgvbhChi: 諸善男子。如虛空界。自性清淨心亦復如是。如風大
界。不正思惟亦復如是。如水大海。諸業煩惱亦復如是。如地大界。陰界入等亦復如是。是故說言。一切諸法皆無根本。皆無堅實。無住無住本。根本清淨。無根本故。O friends, since this is the gate into the lig
ht of the dharma (dharmālokamukha) called Prakṛtiviśuddhimukha, the bodhisatvas, having enter into it, are not establish
ed in the gate of any vice (sarvakleśamukha) and not proud of any pure gate as well.Since all of them destroy haughtines
s, they penetrate the suitable way (sārūpyagāminī pratipad) and transcend all sphere of the Māra.Since they transcend th
e sphere of the Māra, they are established in the sphere of the buddha.Since they are established in the sphere of the b
uddha, they enter into the sphere of all beings.Since they enter into the sphere of all beings, they do not agitate the 
sphere of the absolute truth (dharmadhātu).Since they are in accordance with the sphere of the absolute truth, they obta
in the omniscience (sarvajñajñāna) by obtaining sameness and no distinction (samanirviśeṣatā).When the teaching was taug
ht, many bodhisatvas became free from all manifestations of mental disturbance (sarvakaukṛtyaparyutthāna), manifestation
of the hindrances [to obtain] the dharma (dharmāvaraṇaparyutthāna), and the actions and vices (karmakleśa), and then at
tained the tolerance that all things are unborn (anutpattikadharmakṣānti).

Upāsaka Śrīgupta

gaganagañjaparipṛcchā, volume 8Then a lay practitioner by name of Śrīgupta, having bowed down at the Lord’s feet, address
ed himself to the Lord:“O Lord, you set forth this exposition of religion which is the gate into the liberation from the
dharma (dharmavimuktimukhadharmaparyāya) for me. Why is that? Lord, I tried to kill you by dropping you into a hole or 
by serving poisoned food, and even though I heard many teachings from you, I was not able to clear my doubts. However, L
ord, having heard this exposition of religion, I do not have any doubt and obtain the light of all dharmas (sarvadharmāl
oka).O Lord, by obtaining the light without any regret or doubt, I will produce the thought of incomparable complete awa
kening and attain distinction just like the wicked Māra.”The Lord said: “Good, very good, householder, you fully underst
and the meaning of what I have preached (bhāṣitasyārtha). I prophesy that you, having honoured, revered, venerated, and 
worshipped all the buddhas in the good aeon (bhadrakalpa) with your mind and highest intension (cittādhyāśaya), will pra
ctice the holy life (brahmacaryā) in their places, and will grasp the true dharma (saddharma).After that, since you have
pleased innumerable buddhas, after seven hundred innumerable aeons (asaṃkhyeyakalpa), in the stainless aeon (amalakalpa
), you will be born in the world as the tathāgata Sarvaparyutthānavikiraṇa, equipped with knowledge, conduct and other q
ualities, the Awakened Lord (vidyācaraṇasaṃpanno iti yāvad buddho bhagavān bhaviṣyasi).Having heard the prophecy of the 
Lord concerning the incomparable complete awakening, a lay practitioner Śrīgupta, being contented, elated, enraptured, o
verjoyed, exultant and jubilant (tuṣṭodagrāttamanāḥ pramuditaḥ prītisaumanasyajātaḥ), offered all his ornaments for the 
body of the Lord, and said:“O Lord, in my house I have four great treasuries, which are full of gold and plenty of jewel
s.Among them, one will be given to my wife and children, male and female slaves and workers (putradāradāsīdāsakarmakara)
.Another will be given to all the poor and beggars (sarvadaridrayācanaka).A third will be given to monks coming from fou
r directions and the monastic communities in four directions.The other will be given to the monastic community headed by
the Buddha (buddhapramukhabhikṣusaṅgha).O Lord, as I do not have any worldly attachment (amama) nor property (aparigrah
a), I pray that I may leave the world for the well-explained discipline, be ordained, and obtain the way as a monk (labh
eyāhaṃ svākhyāte dharmavinaye pravrajyām upasampadaṃ bhikṣubhāvam).”Then Śrīgupta thereupon left the world for the well-
explained discipline, was ordained, and obtained the way as a monk.The bodhisatva Gaganagañja addressed himself to the L
ord: “After the tathāgata become extinguished, O Lord, who will uphold this awakening which has been established for inc
alculable koṭis of aeons?”At that time, sixty koṭis of bodhisatvas, having stood up from the congregation, joined their 
palms, paid homage to the Lord, and then uttered these verses in one voice:

