Then, the Lord went on to speak these verses (atha khalu bhagavāṃs tasyāṃ velāyāṃ imā gāthā abhāṣata):

67 They purify the abilities of perception (indriya) by meditation, and concentrate with one-pointed mind (ekāgramanas) b
y recollection (smṛti).Even though they are not dependent on anything, they still remains absorbed in sameness toward al
l beings (sarvajagat).

68 Even though they remain in the inner and outer aspects of existence, they are not dependent on the parts of personalit
y, fields of the senses, or spheres (skandhāyatanadhātu).[Staying] in the transcendent sphere (vivekagocara) of tranquil
ity (upaśānta), the wise are always in the state of concentration (samāhita).

69 Since they are always concentrated in universal sameness (samatā), their minds (manas) are similar to (samasadṛśa) the
sphere of the dharma (dharmadhātu).Their thoughts are absolutely dissociated (atyantavivikta), but they still manifest 
it. The wise meditate on everything, but they are not attached to anything.

70 In order to bring living beings to maturity, they teach about the end of death (cyuti) and birth (jāti).They never giv
e up (parijahāti) concentrating (samādhi), they are the way they are by the power of the understanding of thoughts (citt
āvabodhi).

71 While in the state of concentration (samādhi) of the sphere without form (ārūpyadhātu), [they still practice] for the 
sake of the maturation (pariṇāmanā) of living beings.Illuminating the sphere of desire (kāmadhātu), they are dependent o
n neither themselves nor living beings.

72 The sphere of existence is like empty space (gagana), an illusion (māyā), a mirage (marīci), like a dream (svapna), th
e moon reflected in water (udakacandra), and a cloud (megha).They, having understood the essential character of all dhar
mas like this, always remain in the state of concentration.

73 In the sphere of thoughts (cittagocara) with all beings, they engage their though and consciousness in living beings.S
ince their continuity of thoughs (cittasaṃtāṇa) is unobstructed (anāvaraṇa), they have insight (prajñā) also in the cont
inuity of their own thoughts.

74 By means of skill in meditation (dhyāna) and the supernormal knowledge of magical power (ṛddhyabhijñā), they go to a g
reat number of millions of Buddha-fields (buddhakṣetra) to make offerings to innumerable Buddhas, with a mind removed fr
om the vice of all ignorance (sarvājñānakleśa),

75 Having trained senses (indriya) and [attained] the tranquility of minds, they become perfected in peaceful meditation 
(śamatha) without any false discrimination (avikalpa).Having made living being’s minds tranquil, they are always concent
rated on the strength of insight (prajña).

76 Even if they are in the state of universal sameness, there is nothing to be attained because it is beyond distinguishi
ng marks (animitta).They who abide in the universal sameness (samatāpratiṣṭhita) are always in the state of concentratio
n.

6. PrajñāHow, son of good family, does the insight of the bodhisatva become like empty space (kathaṃ kulaputra bodhisatva
sya prajñāṃ gaganasamam)?

