31 Aalways giving a gift with the pure thought for the sake of awakening, [the bodhisatvas] do not expect any reward (vip
āka).They, having been pleased and delighted (hṛṣṭatuṣṭa), never feel regret about it. And they, having been liberated, 
always give a gift.

32 The wise people, having understood the fact that all moments of existence are like an illusion (māyopama), are not att
ached to their bodies and lives (kāyajīvita).They never hold on them, in such a way, they are certain to attain the awak
ening (sambodhi niyato mataḥ).

33 Although they give everything (sarvatyāga), they are not unhappy, and in that [generosity], they are not dejected and 
despondent (aviṣādānavalīna).Because of that, they meditate on the dharmas being just as open space (gagana), and there 
is no elation or dejection.

34 Since their nature is originally pure, they give a gift with the purity of awakening.Since they are not attached to (a
sakta) their train of thoughts (cittasaṃtāna), they give a gift without any discursive thinking (niṣprapañca).

35 Giving a gift with the same thought (samacitta) and same mind (samamanas), they give without the three [kinds of discr
imination of] superior, mediocre, and inferior (hīnamadhyaviśiṣṭa).Since their intentions (āśaya) are pure (pariśuddha) 
and undefiled, they do not expect any reward (vipāka).

36 Unlike giving (dāna), body and life are impermanent (anitya), and possessions (bhoga) are just like a dream (svapna) a
nd a lightning (vidyut).Having generated compassion (karuṇā) for the whole world, they give a gift, being undefiled (anu
palipta) by the worldly elements (lokadharma).

37 They give the whole of their possessions (sarvasva) for the sake of the purification of afflictions (kleśa), and decid
e to establish the word of the Victorious One (jina).None of the Evil Ones (māra) are able to get at them (na avatāraṃ l
apsyante), and they, having understood in such a way, give away everything (sarvatyāga).

38 Giving by means of ten powers (daśabala) is the root, it is taught. Being based on that, they are endowed with moralit
y (śīla).They, having been established in the qualities of morality (śīlaguṇa), attain meditation (dhyāna), and fulfill 
(paripūrayati) the qualities of unattached insight (asaktaprajñā).

39 Their thoughts are satisfied with giving (dāna) and discipline (vinaya), and their afflictions (kleśa), having been bu
rned (dagdha), do not arise [again].Giving is taught for the benefit of oneself and others (svapara), and they are happy
because the giving causes benefit and comport (hitasukha).

40 They give a gift for the sake of virtue (kuśala) and getting rid of afflictions (kleśaprahāṇa), for that reason they d
o not desire to grasp (grāha) [anything].Giving is not only for the sake of the afflictions of others but also for the s
ake of awakening which is purity of one’s own mind.

41 The more (yathā yathā) they give [a gift] with the undiminished thought (anavalīnacitta), the more (tathā tathā) they 
attain the quality of awakening.The more they attain the quality of awakening, the more they satisfy a hundred living be
ings.

2. ŚīlaThen the Lord said this to the bodhisatva, the great being Gaganagañja (atha khalu bhagavān gaganagañjaṃ bodhisatv
aṃ mahāsatvam āmantrayate sma):

