25. DharmadhātuHow then, son of good family, does the bodhisatva relate to the guiding principle of the sphere of moments
of existence (dharmadhātunaya), being united with (samavasarati) the sphere of all moments of existence (sarvadharmadhā
tu)?‘The sphere of moments of existence (dharmadhātu)’ is the sphere that is free from desire since it is free from any 
impurity (rāgavigatadhātuḥ sarvarajavigatatayā?);the sphere of non-origination (anutpanna) since it is not something in 
particular (asamudānīta);the sphere without cessation (anirodha) since there is no occurrence;the sphere that does not g
o anywhere (agamanatā) since there is no transmigration (gamana);the sphere without coming (anāgamanatā) since there is 
no passing over;the sphere without abiding since there is no arising;the sphere as it really is (yathāvaddharmadhātu) be
cause of its sameness in all three times (tryadhvasamatā);the sphere of self (ātmadhātu) since it is originally pure (ād
iviśuddhi);1the sphere without personality (niḥpudgaladhātu) since it is the highest truth (paramārtha);the sphere witho
ut information (avijñāptidhātu) since it is non-abiding;the sphere without basis (anālayadhātu) since there is no contam
ination (saṃkīrṇa);the sphere without birth (anutpādadhātu) since it is fixed (niyāma);the sphere like the space (gagana
dhātu) since it is essentially tranquil (svabhāva_pariśuddhi);the sphere of liberation (nirvāṇadhātu) since there is no 
argument against it (apratipakṣa);such is the entrance into the way of the sphere of moments of existence (dharmadhātuna
yapreveśa).Since all moments of existence are like this, son of good family, if the bodhisatva enteres into the way of m
oments of existence, then, whatever he says, expresses, or teaches, all that is united with (samavasṛta) the sphere of m
oments of existence.Having entered into the way of the sphere of moments of existence, he knows the fact that there is n
o duality of the sphere of desire and the moments of existence (rāgadhātudharmadhātu)- why? - because the desire (rāga) 
has the nature of the sphere of all moments of existence;there is no duality of the sphere of aversion (dveṣadhātu) and 
the sphere of moments of existence - why? - because aversion has the nature of the sphere of all moments of existence;th
ere is no duality of the sphere of delusion (mohadhātu) and the sphere of moments of existence - why? -because delusion 
has the nature of all moments of existence;there is no duality of the sphere of vices (kleśadhātu) and the sphere of mom
ents of existence - why? - because vices has the nature of the sphere of all moments of existence;there is no duality of
the sphere of passion (kāmadhātu) and the sphere of moments of existence - why? - because passion has the nature of the
sphere of all moments of existence;there is no duality of the sphere of forms (rūpadhātu) and the sphere of moments of 
existence - why? - because forms has the nature of the sphere of all moments of existence;there is no duality of the sph
ere without form (ārūpyadhātu) and the sphere of moments of existence - why? - because the formlessness has the nature o
f the sphere of all moments of existence;there is no duality of the sphere of the eye (cakṣurdhātu) and the sphere of mo
ments of existence - why? - because the eye has the nature of the sphere of all moments of existence;there is no duality
of the sphere of forms (rūpadhātu) and the sphere of moments of existence - why? - because forms has the nature of the 
sphere of all moments of existence;there is no duality of the sphere of eye-consciousness (cakṣurvijñānadhātu) and the s
phere of moments of existence - why? - because eye-consciousness has the nature of the sphere of all moments of existenc
e;there is no duality of the sphere in the interval of mind and the sphere of moments of existence - why? - because the 
sphere of mind has the nature of the sphere of all moments of existence;there is no duality of the sphere of mind-consci
ousness (manovijñānadhātu) and the sphere of moments of existence - why? - because the sphere of mind-consciousness has 
the nature of the sphere of all moments of existence;there is no duality of the sphere of aggregates (skandhadhātu) and 
the sphere of moments of existence - why? - because the sphere of aggregates has the nature of the sphere of all moments
of existence;there is no duality of the sphere of earth, water, fire or wind (pṛthivīdhātvabdhātutejodhātuvāyudhātu) an
d the sphere of moments of existence - why? - because the earth, water, fire or wind has the nature of the sphere of all
moments of existence;there is no duality of the eighty-four thousand masses of religious teaching (caturaśītidharmaskan
dhasahasranirdeśa), the eighty-four thousand kinds of behaviour (caturaśītisahasracaritāna) or all moments of existence 
(sarvadharma) and the sphere of all moments of existence - why? - because all moments of existence have the nature of th
e sphere of all moments of existence.The bodhisatva knows all moments of existence since the moments of existence which 
is the entrance into the sameness (samatāpraveśa) is united with all moments of existence. Son of good family, this is t
he entering into the way of moments of existence of the bodhisatva.

