Then, the Lord went on to speak these verses (atha khalu bhagavāṃs tasyāṃ velāyāṃ imā gāthā abhāṣata):

77 Insight cuts off wrong views (darśana), darkness (andhakāra) and vices (kleśa), removes the defilement of habitual ten
dency (vāsanakleśa), reveals (nidṛś-) causes, conditions, effects (hetupratyayakiryā), and eliminates all extremes (sarv
ānta).

78 Insight is not dependent on self, living beings, individual, and life principle (ātmasatvapudgalajīva), makes [living 
beings] free from existence and non-existence (bhāvābhāva), and teaches them to practice the perfection of insight (praj
ñāpāramitā).

79 Insight is free from vices (kleśa) because it conquers the Evil Ones (māra); it saves [living beings] out of the strea
m (augha) and releases them; it creates knowledge (jñāna) and related behaviour; and it reveals the highest happiness of
liberation (mokṣa).

80 Insight purifies the root of hinderance (āvaraṇamūla); it is the mark of knowledge (parijñā) about the part of persona
lity and spheres (skandhadhātu); it is the liberation from its characteristics since there is no distinction between a c
haracteristic and something to be characterized (lakṣaṇalakṣya). By attaining the insight, he is adorned in the three re
alms.

81 Pure behaviour (pariśuddhacaryā) is called insight (prajñeti), and therefore it is a behaviour not sullied (sarvalokān
upalipta) by anything in the world. [If] he practice to understand the practice of [insight], he who has pure insight wi
ll be adorned.

82 The dharma is taught in order to purify the five kinds of sight (pañcacakṣur), to illuminate the five kinds of abiliti
es (pañcendriya), to eliminate the five states of existence (pañcagati), and to makes the five aggregates disappear (pañ
caskandha).

83 It is not dependent on this side nor that side, but established in the sphere of all moments of existence (dharmadhātu
ḥ), same as the sameness of the sky (āntarīkṣa), and it exalts a being in accordance with the knowledge of the Buddha (b
uddhajñāna).

84 It teaches the way of entering into immortality (amṛta) where all the noble ones have gone, which is free from the dua
lity of gain and loss (alābhalābha), but still does not construct thought-constructions belonging to the middle way of l
ogical proposition (madhyakalpana).

85 Having thought suffering (duḥkha), in this manner, it gets rid of craving (tṛṣṇā). Having shown ways, it declares its 
extinction (nirodha).It enters into the insight (prajñā) to understand truth (satya), thereby cuts off the past (pūrvānt
a).

86 All fields of perception (sarvakṣetra) are not being like fields of perception. All moments of existence (sarvadharma)
are distinct from (pravivikta) being like any moments of existence. All beings (sarvasatva) are same as beings without 
the self (anātma). The insight investigating with intelligence knows this.

7. PuṇyaHow then, son of good family, does the merit of bodhisatvas become like the expanse of the sky (tatra kulaputra k
atamo bodhisatvānāṃ puṇyaṃ gaganasamam)?The qualities of the Buddha (buddhadharma) are just like the expanse of the sky,
and their potential, the thought of awakening (bodhicittabīja), is also like the expanse of the sky.Because, son of goo
d family, although he accumulates the merit of bodhisatva, he never forgets the thought of awakening (bodhicittāvirahita
), and collecting the roots of good (kuśalamūla), he transforms (pariṇāmayati) those accumulations into omniscience (sar
vajñātā), and thus establish them (pratiṣṭhita) in being like the immeasurable expanse of the sky.The bodhisatva should 
think thus: “I will accumulate (abhisaṃkaromi) immeasurable merits in the same way as the expanse the sky is immeasurabl
e.”Since the effort is endless (apramāṇārambha), it increases into an immeasurable good (apramāṇārtha). Here the bodhisa
tva should strive (yogaḥ karaṇīyaḥ) for immeasurable accumulations of merit (aprameyapuṇyasaṃbhāra);

