Māra Pāpīyān

When this teaching was taught and verses were accomplished, the wicked Māra, having magically created four kinds of troop
s (caturaṅgabala), came to the courtyard where the Lord stayed with them, stationed them on the outside of the courtyard
, disguised himself as a householder (gṛhapati), went in front of the Lord, and bowed down at his feet (bhagavataḥ pādau
śirobhir vanditvā), saying:“Because these good men, the bodhisatva Gaganagañja and Ratnapāṇi, are endowed with immeasur
able good qualities, and so are the other bodhisatvas, it is possible to manifest such wonderful teachings (āścaryādbhut
adharma) and magical displays (prātihārya) in this world. However, Lord, will there be someone believing these magical d
isplays in the future?”The Lord said: “As a small amount of water in the great ocean can be lifted up by means of the ti
p of a hair (vālāgrakoṭi), so few beings will have faith in the magical displays (prātihārya) of these good men. However
, there will be great many beings who do not have faith, compared to the quantity of water in the ocean.”Having heard th
is word, the wicked Māra, became contented, elated, enraptured, overjoyed, exultant and jubilant (atha khalu māraḥ pāpīy
āṃs tuṣṭodagrāttamanāḥ pramuditaḥ prītisaumanasyajāto bhavati), danced and was about to leave the congregation.The the v
enerable Śāriputra addressed himself to the Lord: “O Lord, who is this man (puruṣa) going away from this congregation wi
th so much pleasure?”The Lord said: “O Śāriputra, he is the Māra, who, disguised as a householder, came to the tathāgata
in order to make this exposition of religion (dharmaparyāya) disappear. Having heard that there will be only few beings
who have belief in this religious exposition, he is about to leave this congregation, joyfully singing, ‘There will be 
only few followers of the ascetic Gautama, but mine will be numerous.’”At that time the bodhisatva Gaganagañja said to t
he wicked Māra: “Wicked One, why are you leaving after having shown your true colors?”Then the wicked Māra thought: “Bec
ause the bodhisatva Gaganagañja and other bodhisatvas will come to my territory (māragocara), to say nothing of the tath
āgata (prāg eva tathāgataḥ). So now I will go back to my territory.”Then the bodhisatva Gaganagañja, having stopped the 
wicked Māra and his servants in the vault of the sky, exercised his magical power in such a way (tathādhiṣṭhita) that th
ey could not go back to his territory, and said this to the Māra: “Wicked One, as open space is without obstruction (ana
vṛti), why do you not go back to your territory?”Māra said: “Son of good family, the sky is without obstruction (gaganam
anāvṛtam) to you, but it looks dark to us. The only we can see in front of us is darkness (tamo’ndhakāra), except for t
he congregation (parṣanmaṇḍala) of the Buddha on the ground, which looks luminous.”Gaganagañja said: “So it is, Wicked O
ne, it is beings who have the light of the dharma in their thoughts (śukladharmacittasatva), and the darkness in front o
f you is because of the works of Māra (mārakarman).”Māra said: “O good man, from now on I will never do the works of Mār
a.”Gaganagañja said: “As it is difficult to keep your promise among such wicked beings, you should come down here and li
sten the discipline of the dharma (dharmavinaya) taught by the tathāgata, together with your servants.”Then the wicked M
āra and his servants unwillingly (akāmaka) went down from the vault of the sky, and the bodhisatva Gaganagañja said this
to the congregation of bodhisatvas: “Sons of good family, may all of you elucidate (pratibhātu) the gates into the dhar
ma of transcending the path of the works of Māra (mārakarmamārgasamatikramadharmamukha).”The bodhisatva Kāñcanaparvatarā
ja thereupon said: “Giving up your sphere is to be attached to the sphere of Māra (māraviṣaya). Knowing that everywhere 
is the sphere of the buddha (buddhaviṣaya) is to know the sphere of the buddha. If you do not see the sphere of the budd
ha, how can you see your own sphere? In that way the bodhisatva who has transcended the sphere has also transcended the 
sphere of Māra. This is the gate into the dharma of transcending the sphere of Māra.”The bodhisatva Ratnaśrī said: “Sinc
e the objects of thought is the sphere of Māra (māragocara), where there is not any dharma perceived, what would be acco
mplished by Māra there? Since the attainment is without basis, the understanding through time that there is no attainmen
t with basis is the gate into the dharma called ‘Transcending the sphere of Māra of the bodhisatva.’”The bodhisatva Ratn
apāṇi said: “When you grasp or possess something, then the Māra will find your weak point (avatāraṃ labh-). When you do 
not grasp any dharma, there will be no disagreement with anyone. When you are alone without the second, you do not make 
your own thinking or own place [into problem], and then how can you stay together with the Māra? Thus the bodhisatva who
is established in nothing transcends the sphere of the Māra.”The bodhisatva Āryaratna said: “‘Sin’ (āpatti) is an accus
ation, and in such an accusation the Māra can find a weak point. What is the absence of sin (anpatti) is not to enter in
to the consciousness of following in accordance with the distinguishing marks [of sins] (nimittānusāriṇavijñānāpraveśa),
and thus the bodhisatva who is established in the limit of no distinguishing mark transcends the sphere of the Māra.”Th
e bodhisatva Ratnacitta said: “The Lord taught that vices (kleśa) are just like a reflection (pratibimba) and an illusio
n (pratibhāsa). Knowing that the reflection and illusion are not changing nor not changing, not coming nor going, withou
t inside nor outside, and remain in no location or dimension (sthānāsthānavigatā) is not living with any vice. The vices
do not arise due to the absence of thought-construction; the vices do not cease due to the absence of thought-construct
ion. In this way, the bodhisatva who is established in the absence of thought-construction and false imagination transce
nds the sphere of the Māra.”The bodhisatva Ratnākara said: “Happiness is a latent tendency (anuśaya); unhappiness is an 
obstruction. One who is without happiness or unhappiness does not have any affection (anunaya) or hostility (pratigha). 
One who is without affection or hostility is established in sameness. One who is established in sameness does not differ
entiate any dharma. One who is established in the absence of differentiation does not think about sameness or non-samene
ss. When you obtain this inconceivable dharma, the Māra cannot find your weak point.”The bodhisatva Ratnaparityāga said:
“The works of Māras (mārakarman) is produced from obsession with self (ātmasamutthāna). When you are established in the
purity of self, what can the Māra do? Why is that? Because vices are purified by the purity of self (ātmaviśuddhi), and
all dharmas are purified by the purity of vices. That which purifies all dharmas purifies open space. Thus the bodhisat
va who is established in the purity of open space transcends the sphere of the Māra.The bodhisatva Dharmarāja said: “Jus
t as one, who obtains the consecration of the king (rājābhiṣeka), and who has power and numerous attendants, is fearless
, just so the bodhisatva, who obtains the consecration, and who has the attendants of the jewel of the dharma (dharmarat
na), has no fear of any Māra. Here the consecration is to reach the extreme of the qualities of the buddha (paryantabudd
hadharma) and to fulfill them, and the attendants of the jewel of the dharma (dharmaratna) is to learn the dharmas taugh
t by the buddhas in ten directions. Since the bodhisatva who is established in such a way transcends the sphere of the M
āra, this is the gate into the dharma called ‘Transcending the sphere of the Māra.’”The bodhisatva Śailaśikharasaṃghaṭṭa
narāja said: “Just as the wind enters through a chink, just so the Māra can find a weak point where there is a chink in 
thought. The bodhisatva therefore should not have any chink in his thought. Here, the thought without chink is, that is 
to say, to fulfill the emptiness endowed with all sorts of excellencies (tadyathāpi nāma cchidrān mārutaḥ praviśati evam
eva yato yata eva cittasya cchidraṃ bhavati tatas tata eva māro ’vatāraṃ labhate | tasmāt sadā ’cchidracittena bodhisat
tvena bhavitavyaṃ tatreyam acchidracittatā | yad idaṃ sarvākārajñatāyāḥ śūnyatāyāḥ paripūrir). This is the gate to the l
ight of the dharma (dharmālokamukha) that the bodhisatva transcends the sphere of the Māra.”Quotation from ŚikṣMS 60b5-7
; B 117,7-10; ŚikṣTib(D) 67b1-3; ŚikṣChi(T.1636) 97c27-98a1.ŚikṣMS: āryagaganagañjasūtre ’py uktaṃ (6) tadyathāpi nāma c
chidrān mārutaḥ praviśati evam eva ‹yato›1 yata eva cittasya cchidraṃ bhavati tatas tata eva māro ’vatāraṃ labhate tasmā
t sadā ’cchidracittena bodhisattvena bhavitavyaṃ tatreyam acchidracittatā | yad idaṃ sarvvākārajñatāyāḥ śūnyatāyāḥ pari(
7)pūrir iti |ŚikṣTib: ’phags pa nam mkha’ mdzod kyi mdo las kyaṅ | ’di lta ste dper na bu ga nas rluṅ ’jug pa de bźin du
gaṅ daṅ gaṅ nas sems la skyon byuṅ ba de daṅ de ñid nas bdud kyis glags rñed do || de lta bas na byaṅ chub sems dpa’ rt
ag tu sems la skyon med par bya’o ||ŚikṣChi: 又虚空藏經云譬如孔隙聲入其中。菩薩亦爾。若心有間隙則魔得其便。是故菩薩令心常無間隙。若心無間隙。則諸相圓滿。及空性圓滿。The bodhisatva 
Priyadarśana said: “That among all kinds of seeing, seeing the buddha and his dharma is the most excellent. Here, seeing
the buddha is not to see form, feeling, perception, formative factors or consciousness. The correct seeing (samyagdṛṣṭi
) is to see the buddha. Seeing the dharma is not to make any mental effort (manasikāra). The unchanging seeing is to be 
free from attachment (rāga). Being free from attachment is to see the dharma. That the bodhisatva comes to be endowed wi
th seeing the buddha and his dharma in that way is transcending the sphere of the Māra. This is the gate into the dharma
called ‘Transcending the sphere of the Māra.’”The bodhisatva Indrajālin said: “Since the deeds of the Māra arises from 
action [of speech], mental activity and movements [of body] (iñjitamanyanāsyandita), the bodhisatva should be free from 
the basis of action [of speech], mental activity and movements [of body], which are superficial mental activities (ayoni
śomanasikāra). With the thorough practice (yoniśaḥprayoga), the bodhisatva who is free from action [of speech], mental a
ctivity and movements [of body] transcends the sphere of the Māra.”The bodhisatva Guṇarājaprabhāsa said: “As many as the
re are antidotes (pratipakṣa), so many are the works of the Māra (mārakarman). The absence of antidote is [included in] 
the realm of the dharma (dharmadhātu), and all dharmas are [included in] the realm of the dharma. Since all dharmas are 
included in the realm of the dharma (dharmadhātusamavasaraṇa), all the dharmas are understood through understanding the 
realm of the dharma. The works of the Māra is not apprehended apart from the realm of the dharma, and the realm of the d
harma which is the same as the works of the Māra is not different from suchness (tathatā). In this way, the bodhisatva w
ho enters into one single principle (ekanaya) transcends the sphere of the Māra.”The bodhisatva Gandhahastin said: “The 
weak (durbala) can be harmed by the Māra; but the strong (balika) cannot be harmed by the Māra. The weak is afraid of th
e three gates of liberation (trivimokṣamukha). Since the strong is not afraid of the three gates of liberation, namely, 
directly seeing (pratyakṣa), penetrating (supratividdha), and meditatively cultivating. One who is not afraid of them tr
anscends the sphere of the Māra, and thus this is the gate into the light of the dharma (dharmālokamukha) called ‘Transc
ending the sphere of the Māra.”The bodhisatva Maitreya said: “Just as the water in the great ocean (mahāsāgara) has a si
ngle taste (ekarasa), so all dharmas in the great ocean of the knowledge of the dharma (dharmajñānasāgara) have a single
taste. Since the works of the Māra (mārakarma) and the works of the buddha (buddhakarma), both are same in the perspect
ive of emptiness (śūnyatā), signlessness (animitta), wishlessness (apraṇihita), birthlessness (ajāti), and the absence o
f origination (anutpāda), the bodhisatva who enters into the single taste (ekarasa) transcends the sphere of the Māra.”T
he bodhisatva Gaganagañja said: “O friends (vata mārṣāḥ), since open space transcends all spheres, it is not the sphere 
of sight (cakṣurviṣaya), and likewise it is not the sphere of hearing, smelling, tasting, body and mind (śrotraghrāṇajih
vākāyamanaḥ). Since all dharmas are the sphere of the essential nature of open space (gaganasvabhāva), body and speech (
kāyavāc) are the light of knowledge (jñānāloka) in accordance with the sameness of open space (gaganasamatā). Thus the b
odhisatva who obtains this light of knowledge transcends the sphere of the Māra, and this is the gate into the dharma ca
lled ‘Transcending the sphere of the Māra.’”The bodhisatva Mañjuśrī said: “O good man, all you have said is the works of
the Māra and the sphere of the Māra. Why is that? Things expressed by words are a mere information (vijñapti); but the 
speech of the buddha (buddhaghoṣa) is beyond verbal expressions (anakṣara). Since, as many as are words, so many are the
works of the Māra, when there is not any word, nothing would be done by the Māra. Since that which is without word is w
ithout information, one never perceives the self or other (na ātmaparaṃ samanupaśyati). Since there is no self or others
, the dharma which causes benefit or harm does not exist. Understanding like this is transcending the sphere of the Māra
, and, son of good family, this is the gate into the dharma called ‘Transcending the sphere of the Māra of the bodhisatv
a.’”Then the bodhisatva Gaganagañja said this to the wicked Māra: “Wicked One, did you hear this gate into the dharma of
transcending the sphere of the Māra?”Māra said: “Yes, I heard.”Gaganagañja said: “Wicked One, are you still going to do
the works of the Māra among the bodhisatvas who entered into such guiding principle of the dharma (dharmanaya)?”Māra sa
id: “Son of good family, by hearing this gate into the dharma of transcending the sphere of the Māra, I would not dare t
o do the works of the Māra among those who listen to it, to say nothing of the bodhisatvas who see it directly (pratyakṣ
a) by their knowledges.”At that time, four gods, Saṃcayavigata, Sukhasaṃcaya, Gandhavat, and Prāsādavat, who guarded the
bodhisatvas, said to the Wicked Māra:“In the past, at the place of awakening (bodhimaṇḍa), the Lord met you, your force
s, troops, army and servants directly. At that time, the Lord touched the ground with the jewels in his hand (ratnapāṇi)
, which are the accumulation of friendliness, compassion, generosity, discipline, restrain, gentleness, morality, learni
ng, concentration, insight, firm and burning effort, merit and knowledge (maitrīkaruṇadānavinayasaṃyamasauratyaśīlaśruta
samādhiprajñādṛḍhottaptavīryapuṇyajñānasaṃbhāra), and then the endless, limitless worlds (anantāparyanteṣu lokadhātuṣu) 
were shaken. In that way it was manifested that you and your forces were defeated, but will you still do the works of Mā
ra under the Lord and the bodhisatvas? You should pay homage to the tathāgata and the assembly of the bodhisatvas!”Then 
the Wicked One, having conjured up canopies adorned with eighty four thousand jewels (ratnacchattra), offered them to th
e congregations. Having held numerous kinds of divine flowers (divyapuṣpa), incense (gandha), garlands (mālā) and unguen
ts (upalepana), he scattered them on the place where the Lord stayed, and said this to the Lord together with his servan
ts: “If the bodhisatva Gaganagañja gives us the treasury of open space (gaganagañja), we will produce the thought of the
incomparable complete awakening (anuttarasamyaksaṃbodhi).”The bodhisatva Gaganagañja said: “Wicked One, do you see this
treasury of open space?”Māra said: “I see it, son of good family. It is far greater than all the displays of desire rea
lm, buddha-fields, and my own abode (svabhavana), and it is full of the jewels for gods and humans.Gaganagañja said: “Wi
cked One, I will give you all these treasuries of open space so that you can produce the thought of the incomparable com
plete awakening.”Then the wicked Māra, together with his eighty-four thousand creatures, produced the thought of the inc
omparable complete awakening.At that time, Durmukha who was the head of five hundred sons of the Māra, lacking faith and
desiring the non-dharma (adharmakāma), said: “Even though our father produced the thought of awakening, we should striv
e against this exposition of religion (dharmaparyāya).”Then the Lord said this to the bodhisatva Gaganagañja: “Son of go
od family, elucidate the words of knowledge-mantra (vidyāmantrapada) by which the evil ones as numerous as the grains of
sand in the river Gaṅga are subjugated (nigraha) and established in awakening.”The bodhisatva Gaganagañja thereupon pro
nounced the words of knowledge-mantra as follows:tadyathā | avatte | vivatte | saṃvatte | sahitānusandhi | duruttaraṇi |
nirghātani | maitryāyukte | kāruṇaniṣyande | satyavati | bhūrakṣe | dharmanivṛtti | dharmarakṣe | akkhule | nikhilini |
hulu hulu hulu hulu hulu | tatkāre | tathāvādite | śīlānuvṛtti | akṣayanirdeśe | kleśaparīkṣe | buddhādhiṣṭhite dharmaj
vālini | saṃghānugame | anuttare | anatikramaṇiye | nigrahaṇimārapakṣasya yuktikṛte | adānte | aśaste | svaviṣayānugame 
| āryaguṇakāre | siddhisiddhivate | mokṣānukūle | nigrahaṇi parapravadīnāṃ | dārṣaṇi māraparṣada | avaśāntā | catvāro ma
hārājānaḥ | śakro devānāṃ indro brahmā sahapatir | buddhaprasannānāṃ | devanāgayakṣakṛtaṃ paritrāṇaṃ | satvānāṃ svastyay
ānāṃ | dharmabhanakānāṃ | ārakṣayai | saddharmasya ca parigrahāya |Then, immediately after these words of knowledge-mant
ra were pronounced by the bodhisatva Gaganagañja, the world system of three thousandfold worlds (trisāhasramahāsāhasralo
kadhātu) was shaken in six ways.The five hundred evil ones, who were without faith and clinging to the non-dharma, heard
this sound from open space: “The Māra, his sons, or his followers (mārakāyika), who do not produce the thought of awake
ning and do not give up the works of the Māra after having heard these words of the knowledge-mantra (vidyāmantrapada), 
the crowns of their heads will be destroyed by the lighting and blazing thunderbolt of the Yakṣa Vajrapāṇi.”Then, having
looked up at the sky, the sons of the Māra saw five hundred Vajrapāṇis holding blazing thunderbolt, and produced the th
ought of awakening from the fear and terror (bhayabhīṭa).The Lord at that time smiled (atha khalu bhagavān smitaṃ prādur
akarot), and the venerable Ānanda asked its meaning.Then the Lord said: “Ānanda, did you see those five hundred sons of 
the Māra producing the thought of the incomparable complete awakening (anuttarasamyaksaṃbodhi) out of fear and terror?”Ā
nanda said: “O Lord, I saw it.”The Lord said: “Ānanda, when the wicked Māra attains awakening, they will also be born in
the buddha-fields as bodhisatvas having different name.”The venerable Ānanda said this to the Lord: “O Lord, when will 
the wicked Māra wake up to incomparable complete awakening? What will he be called after having attained the awakening? 
And what will be the name of that universe?”The Lord said: “Ānanda, the wicked Māra, doing the works of the Māra in the 
buddha-fields of ten directions again and again, will hear the dharma of destroying vices by the essence of diamond (vaj
ragarbhakleśapramathanadharma) from the awakened buddhas there, and will see the secret practice, behaviour, good qualit
ies, maintaining morality, practice, ceremony and application of the buddhas and the bodhisatvas. Then, as long as he ha
s faith in the thought of awakening, he will be born [in the universe of] the tathāgata Anantāmaladhvaja, will stop doin
g the works of the Māra by the teaching of [the tathāgata there], will maturate this roots of good, and, by the thought 
which is no thought, in accordance with all the light of the dharma of the buddha (sarvabuddhadharmāvabhāsānugata), will
produce the thought of awakening.After that, he will serve, respect, worship, homage and give offerings to the uncounta
ble and innumerable tathāgatas, and will become a monk following their teachings.Having become a monk, he will uphold th
e true dharma (saddharma) in the three times, and bringing innumerable beings to maturity.After immeasurable forty-four 
intermediate aeons (antarakalpa), he will wake up to incomparable complete awakening, and then in the aeon called Viśudd
hi he will be born in the Pariśuddhipratiṣṭhita universe as the tathāgata Supratiṣṭhitadharmālokalabdha, worthy of offer
ings, the perfectly awakened one, perfect in wisdom and conduct … a blessed one (supratiṣṭhitadharmālokalabdho nāma tath
āgato ’rhan samyakṣaṃbuddho vidyācaraṇasaṃpannaḥ … bhagavān).Again, Ānanda, the Pariśuddhipratiṣṭhita universe will be t
hriving, prosperous, safe, well-provided, and filled with gods and men (ṛddhaś ca sphītaś ca kṣemaś ca subhikṣaś cākīrṇa
devamānuṣaś ca).Ānanda, just as whatever enjoyments (bhoga) or entertainments (samudācāra) living beings in the Tuṣita H
eaven (tuṣitabhavanastha) have, so there will be enjoyments and entertainments [in that universe.]Ānanda, the tathāgata 
Supratiṣṭhitadharmālokalabdha will live to forty internal aeons (antarakalpa) together with the great assembly of sixty-
four koṭis of disciples and the congregation of twelve thousands of bodhisatvas.O Ānanda, those who are the Māra’s sons 
and followers (mārakāyika) at present will be born in the Pariśuddhipratiṣṭhita universe, will reach the complete unsurp
assable awakening, and will be predicted to attain of incomparable complete awakening by the tathāgata Supratiṣṭhitadhar
mālokalabdha, namely the Māra, in his buddha-field.”

